# Chapter 1: America the Polarized

Newt Gingrich (R-GA) was first elected to the House of Representatives in 1978. Gingrich, a history professor, had never held office before. He was an outsider—brash and combative, and not constrained by the same norms as many of his peers. He described Democrats as sick, traitors, and corrupt. Gingrich was ambitious and media savvy. He often made anti-Democrat diatribes to a near-empty chamber, using the newly created CSPAN to broadcast his message to a national TV audience. Gingrich moved up the Republican Party ranks despite angering many of his peers. He was elected Minority Whip in 1989. In 1994, Gingrich, the former outsider, rose to Speaker of the House after engineering a stunning Republican takeover in the midterm elections, ending forty consecutive years of Democratic majority control. Gingrich quickly changed House rules, giving the Speaker more power and punishing members who bucked party leadership. He scrapped seniority norms to reward loyalists with key committee chairmanships. He shortened the House calendar to run Tuesday through Thursday, giving members more time to campaign and raise money. Gingrich and the Republican House majority quickly passed many policies championed by conservatives, including welfare reform and a large cut in the capital gains tax. Soon after, Gingrich used his newfound power to initiate a government shutdown as a negotiation tactic during a budget debate and launch impeachment proceedings against Democrat president Bill Clinton. This event became one of the most contentious political dramas in American history. 

Little did people realize at the time, but Gingrich’s election in 1978 ushered in the beginning of a new, polarized, and more combative era. The ideological divisions between the parties in Washington and later in the state capitols became increasingly well defined. Republicans became uniformly conservative and Democrats liberal. Contrarian voices were marginalized. Once prominent regional divisions within the parties disappeared. Moderates chose to retire, or more extreme primary opponents defeated them, or they were defeated when they could no longer appeal across party lines in competitive districts (Thomsen 2017). The parties became both more internally unified and further apart from each other ideologically. The political landscape had undergone a dramatic transformation. 

Gingrich left the House more than twenty years ago, but the process he helped set in motion is still unfolding. In 2016 America elected Donald Trump, a president that employed many of Gingrich’s scorched-earth tactics in an even more visible way, belittling political opponents and describing opposing partisans as an existential threat to the country. Partisan conflict is rampant. Congress is frequently gridlocked. Things work differently in Washington, DC. Not only are our politics more ideologically polarized, but they are also more vitriolic (Berry and Sobieraj 2013). Scholars and pundits pay a great deal of attention to documenting these changes and assessing their causes and effects. I view elite level politics—the interactions between people who hold elected office, party officials, and partisan media—as essential for understanding mass level behavior. We know that our increasingly polarized politics change how elites behave. Yet, we pay less attention to how these changes influence the average American citizen. 

From a voter’s perspective, the options they face at the ballot box are quite different now from what they were when Gingrich was first elected. Ideologically polarized candidates are the norm. In previous eras, the ideological distinctions between the parties and candidates were murky. Southern Democrats were as, if not more, conservative than many Republicans. The opposite was true of Northeastern Republicans, who were often as liberal as many Democrats. Both parties served as vehicles for a wide range of ideological perspectives. The Democrats were a mix of urban labor interest, progressives, and agrarian Southern conservatives. Simultaneously, the Republicans were a combination of Northeastern establishment liberals, agricultural interests, and Western and Midwestern arch-conservatives. Today’s parties are much more homogenous. Conservative Southern Democrats and liberal Northeastern Republicans are anachronisms—relics of a bygone era (Black and Black 2009; Reiter and Stonecash 2010). Modern Republicans are conservative, and modern Democrats are liberal. There are virtually no exceptions. The ideological divide extends to nearly every issue. The Republican Revolution that reshaped American elite politics has also caused a revolution in mass political behavior. 

This book asserts that the growing ideological and partisan divide at the elite level has profoundly changed how Americans view the parties, politics, and each other. My core claim is that citizens respond to what the parties do and the positions that they adopt. Political behavior is contextdependent—how individuals behave is conditional upon the choices they face. When the parties are polarized, elites send citizens clearer signals about their ideological and policy positions. In contemporary politics, the parties’ messages are consistent on issue after issue. In previous, less divided eras, this was not the case. These divisions are also communicated to the public more directly than they were in the past. Changes in technology and the media environment work to deliver more explicitly ideological content to the American public. The media is fragmented and ideologically diverse. We have moved from an era where the entire country watched the same three television channels to one where Fox News and MSNBC deliver partisan content directly to Americans twentyfour hours a day, along with a wide variety of ideologically partisan news websites. We now can choose news sources that cater to our partisan and ideological tastes. 

The political environment has changed, and the entire electorate feels the repercussions. If we want to understand political behavior and why behavior changes we must think seriously about context. An individual’s behavior varies as a function of their environment. We know that many variables shape voting behavior. Partisanship, policy attitudes, and social group memberships are some of the most important, but there are many, many more. How do we know which of these variables is more or less important at a particular point in time? My answer to this question is to look at the elites. Elite context shapes how variables combine to affect voting behavior. When elites send clear signals, the masses take heed. This uptick in clarity, I argue, is why we have seen such a large increase in the connection between partisanship and policy attitudes, a process called partisan sorting, among citizens (Levendusky 2009). Democrats and Republican elites are deeply and divided on every issue. People can look at the party elite and see how their views align with the available choices. They can also become aware when their beliefs are out of step with those of the elite and update their attitudes to match those of their party brass. Polarization helps citizens connect their values and attitudes with the available choices. 

My broader point is that we can only hope to understand mass political behavior by taking context into account. We have seen wholesale changes in American political behavior over the past fifty years. Partisanship, policy attitudes, and social group memberships are all stronger predictors of political attitudes and behaviors than they were decades ago. This evolution in mass behavior is rooted in changes in elite politics. This realization helps shed light on several puzzles. A great deal of political science literature argues that a particular variable—whether it be partisanship, policy attitudes, ideology, spatial proximity, or some other factor—is the key variable that explains why citizens make the choices they do. I come to this question from a different angle. I do not dispute that partisanship, policy attitudes, and other variables all shape how people behave—rather, how they matter changes. My story is not one where people have attachments to political parties or people have thoughts about government policythey have both. Rather, it is about how their importance rises and falls with the times. My overarching theme is that citizens’ policy attitudes are more important than they once were, and this is because partisan elites have staked out much clearer positions than they did in the past. Elite context matters.

The contextual changes have been profound. In 1950, the American Political Science Association released a report bemoaning the state of the American political parties. The report’s thrust was that America’s political parties were fragmented, ineffectual, and failed to present citizens with meaningful policy alternatives. The report detailed that parties were marked by serious internal divisions, were too concerned with local and regional matters, lacked effective organizations, and were generally ill-equipped to handle the complex task of steering the federal government. The solution, according to the report, was more responsible parties:

	> In an era beset with problems of unprecedented magnitude at home and abroad, it is dangerous to drift without a party system that helps the nation to set a general course of policy for the government as a whole. In a two-party system, when both parties are weakened or confused by internal divisions or ineffective organization it is the nation that suffers. When the parties are unable to reach and pursue responsible decisions, difficulties accumulate and cynicism about all democratic institutions grows. An effective party system requires, first, that the parties are able to bring forth programs to which they commit themselves and, second, that the parties possess sufficient internal cohesion to carry out these programs. (APSA 1950: 17)

The contemporary political parties fit what the APSA report recommended. Internal divisions have given way to party unity. Indistinct policy programs have given way to polarization. While the consequences of these changes might not be what the authors of the 1950 APSA report anticipated, there is no denying that today’s parties closely resemble the report’s recommendations. The parties present citizens with two distinct policy agendas. Party leadership exacts discipline on the rank and file. Regional divisions within the parties have evaporated. 

It seems obvious that the evolution of the Democratic and Republican parties at the elite level would affect mass-level political behavior. Yet, much of the political science scholarship does not assess how changes in the political environment affect mass behavior. Many scholars often draw conclusions about public opinion and political behavior by pooling data that spans decades, implicitly or explicitly assuming that the relationships between key variables remain constant. This assumption is an oversight. I argue that elite context, particularly the polarization level between partisan elites, affects Americans’ political behaviors. Americans now face the choice between two starkly different policy programs. This clarity has activated Americans’ policy attitudes and made them a much more powerful consideration at the ballot box. Humans are nearly infinitely adaptable. Our behaviors change with the times. Social mores, technology, and institutions change. Sometimes these evolutions are slow. Other times they are rapid. Regardless of the pace, we should expect that citizens will adapt to these shifting contexts, whatever they are. The rise of polarization among elected officials has been the most important contextual change in the past half-century. 

Much of this book examines Americans’ attitudes about what the government should or should not do on economic and social matters. Throughout the coming chapters, I establish that Americans’ policy attitudes are an important political disposition. This claim departs from much of the conventional wisdom. A wide swath of academic literature writes off Americans as unable to think about politics in terms of values or policy priorities. To their credit, several pieces of evidence speak to this perspective. Perhaps the most important is that policy attitudes were weak predictors of vote choice and partisanship through much of the second half of the twentieth century. What many observers fail to realize is that this claim is a product of its environment. Policy attitudes are not universally weak predictors. People have become more apt to connect their votes to their values. Americans became more likely to vote for the candidate that best matches their policy attitudes.

The reason for this increase in salience is straightforward—it takes less effort to determine the candidate or party that best matches my views when the choices I face are clearly defined. Polarization clarifies the choices. People notice. More and more Americans see clear differences between the parties, in terms of both their ideologies and their demographic compositions (Philpot 2017; Ahler and Sood 2018). The differences are glaring. Americans are less willing to overlook a mismatch between their values and the party’s positions. As a result, policy attitudes are stronger predictors of vote choice and partisanship (Zingher and Flynn 2018; Zingher and Flynn 2019). This increase in predictive power has produced changes in aggregate-level voting patterns. Split-ticket voting—which was once prevalent—has declined (Jacobson 2015: 862–864; Davis and Mason 2016). Voting behavior in congressional, state, and municipal elections have nationalized (Zingher and Richman 2019; Sievert and McKee 2019; Abramowitz and Webster 2016). At all levels of government, moderate candidates struggle to get traction. Moderate incumbents are vulnerable to more extreme primary challengers. Partisans are unwilling to support candidates that do not represent their policy positions. 

Elite context and individual-level behavior are intimately linked, and this book establishes the contours of these relationships. A great number of studies, including some of the classics in the study of political behavior (e.g., Campbell et al. 1960; Lewis-Beck et al. 2008a), examine vote choice without taking the broader context into account in a theoretically or empirically rigorous way. Some studies examine how individual moderators like sophistication (Goren 2013) or issue importance (Hillygus and Shields 2014) influence voting behavior, but to the best of my knowledge, none of these studies incorporates contextual data into the models of partisanship and vote choice. I take that next step here by laying out a theory of how elite context shapes mass behavior and then testing this theory by incorporating elite contextual data into individual-level models of vote choice. Because elite context is slow to change, I incorporate data spanning nearly fifty years (1972–2016). As a result, this study spans a much broader period than anything that has come before it. 

I use policy orientations and partisanship, two key empirical concepts, to structure my thinking. I view vote choice as the ultimate product of these two variables. Both policy orientations and partisanship influence vote choice (and a litany of other attitudes and behaviors). The strength of their influence is conditional upon the political environment. Evidence from across scientific disciplines demonstrates that people are sensitive to environmental effects. Geneticists have found that the way genes are expressed can change as a function of the environment. While we often like to debate questions of “nature versus nurture,” there is a large body of evidence that shows that environment conditions how our genes work. The relationship is interactive. Thus, it should come as no surprise that there is a wide body of evidence from across the social sciences that demonstrates social behavior is context-dependent. The same individuals will behave in different ways when placed in different geographic locations (Gimple, Lee, and Kaminski 2006), racial environments (Enos 2016; Enos 2017), and electoral systems (Horowitz 2000; Norris 2004), just to name a few wellestablished examples.

The previous examples illustrate that there are different types of environments. Some of them are hyper-local, such as the composition of a person’s neighborhood, school, or church. These types of contexts are unique to small groups of individuals. These are not the types of environments I am interested in here. I am interested in how the national political environment conditions individual-level behaviors. The national political environment is common to all citizens. Every American shares the same set of presidential candidates, the same Congress, the same Supreme Court, and the same national media. As the example of Newt Gingrich and the Republican Revolution illustrates, the national political environment can and does change a great deal. Some individuals are more sensitive to these changes than others, but everyone is exposed. Contextual shifts shape how individuals evaluate candidates and parties, as well as how they make political decisions.

Early studies of political behavior found that partisanship—an individual’s psychological attachment to a political party—shaped vote choice more strongly than any other factor (Campbell et al. 1960; LewisBeck et al. 2008). This finding has informed numerous subsequent generations of political science scholarship. My issue is not with this finding. I believe it was largely correct—during the 1950s and 1960s. Much has changed since. Voters from the 1950s would scarcely recognize contemporary parties. It is unrealistic to expect that citizens are unaffected. People are not monoliths, after all. The crux of my argument is that Americans have meaningful opinions about what the government should do. Elite polarization activates these orientations. The reason behind this is straightforward. It is harder to overlook mismatches on policy when the differences between the parties are so stark.

Changes in political context affect some people more than others. The best-informed citizens are the most sensitive. Political awareness and information are important moderators and a key to understanding the linkages between environment and behavior. The politically sophisticated are more apt to hold consistent policy attitudes. They also have an easier time connecting their views with the party offerings. The people with the most political awareness are the most likely to notice a mismatch between their views and those of the party they identify with and then update their policy attitudes (to match their party) or their partisanship (to match their policy orientations) in response. In many ways, the sophisticated are canaries in the coal mine. They are most sensitive to the political environment and the first to respond when it changes. However, as I show, it is not just the sophisticated who are sensitive to changes in their surroundings. Citizens regardless of sophistication level—rely on policy orientations more heavily when the elites are polarized.

I am particularly interested in what happens with policy orientations and partisanship conflict. In contemporary politics, most Republican partisans hold conservative policy orientations whereas most Democrats hold liberal orientations. As many have documented, the relationship between policy orientations and partisanship is growing stronger (Abramowitz and Saunders 2006; Abramowitz and Saunders 2008; Levendusky 2009; Davis and Mason 2016; Zingher and Flynn 2018). However, there are still cases where policy orientations do not align with partisanship (e.g., a person with liberal attitudes identifies as a Republican). These discrepancies are hard to overlook amid high levels of polarization. What happens in these cases? Do partisan attachments trump policy orientations, leading individuals to update their policy attitudes to match their party better? Or do people stop identifying with a party? Again, the answer hinges on context. Sometimes partisanship trumps policy orientations. Sometimes the reverse is true. The nature of these relationships depends on both the political environment and individual-level factors such as sophistication.

In this book, I provide a comprehensive explanation of how elite political context shapes mass-level behavior. I begin by detailing a conceptual outline of American political behavior. I use statistical evidence to test my key claims in the later chapters. I ground my explanation of partisan change in four key concepts: policy orientations, partisanship, elite context, and political sophistication. Understanding the interplay between them is key to understanding why they are moving into tighter alignment. I define these core concepts over the next four sections.

### Policy Orientations

I define policy orientations as the predisposition to evaluate a set of government actions within a specific issue domain with some degree of favor or disfavor (from Goren 2013; see Zingher and Flynn 2018). Contemporary public opinion breaks down into two largely independent dimensions, one economic and the other social/moral. Americans have attitudes about what the government should do to aid the poor, provide healthcare and retirement income, and guarantee employment. I show in chapter 4 that Americans’ opinions on this set of questions are correlated. Liberals favor a more active government in mitigating inequality, while conservatives favor a government that does less. Americans also have attitudes about whether the government should allow (or not allow) abortion, gay marriage, prayer in schools, and ensure fair employment and compensation for women. Social conservatives favor a government that takes a more active role in upholding traditional moral values. Social liberals take a more libertine approach and favor a government that does not regulate individual behavior to the same degree. I also show in chapter 4 that Americans’ opinions on moral questions, such as abortion, gay rights, the authority of the Bible, and a woman’s role in society correlate with each other.

The correlations between economic and social policy questions suggest underlying constructs are at work. Economic and social policy orientations are these constructs. Individuals have liberal and conservative policy attitudes and draw on them when expressing their support for potential government actions. I use individuals’ responses to build scales of their underlying levels of liberalism and conservatism. These scales place individuals along a liberal-conservative continuum. One can use several specific statistical techniques to accomplish this task, but as I show in chapter 4, these different techniques produce broadly comparable results.

The various approaches all point to the same conclusion: Americans hold stable orientations toward economic and social policy, and these orientations are consistent year in and year out. 

It is important to keep in mind what policy orientations are and what they are not. I argue that policy orientations are attitudes—people have a general sense of what the government should be doing or not doing. Policy orientations are not ideologies (Goren 2013: 45–47). A logically constrained perspective on how the government should operate does not shape their attitudes. Yes, a person might provide consistently liberal or conservative responses to questions within a particular domain, even if some grander abstract principle does not guide these responses. In these cases, individuals might answer based on intuition or maybe parroting partisan elites. To be sure, ideological principles guide some citizens’ policy orientations, but having a meaningful ideology is not a necessary precondition for having meaningful policy orientations.

Policy orientations’ consistency stems from their origins. Much like partisanship, social group memberships, preadult socialization, and even genetic factors anchor policy orientations. The American Voter (Campbell et al 1960), one of the foundational books in the study of political behavior, which established the Michigan Model of vote choice, argued that people come to see political parties as representing specific social groups. People identify with the party that best represents their group. I contend the same logic applies to policy orientations. Social group memberships shape policy orientations. Individuals identified as members of many social groups. Often, these identifications are strong. Government actions affect different social groups in disparate ways. It should come as no surprise that group memberships shape individuals’ attitudes about what the government should do.

### Partisanship

There is a growing body of evidence that policy orientations are an important political disposition. Yet, there are other important dispositions. Partisanship is an individual’s psychological attachment to a political party. Partisanship is often considered the “unmoved mover” in the study of American political behavior. The logic behind this claim is straightforward. Partisanship is highly stable. Once individuals adopt partisan identities, they generally remain fixed. Partisanship is influential—it is often the most powerful determinant of a wide range of attitudes and behaviors.

Partisanship serves as a lens through which individuals can interpret the world. It is a heuristic. It simplifies questions like: How is the president doing? How would you evaluate the state of the economy? Do you approve of the new bill Congress is considering? Answering these questions requires a considerable amount of information. Gathering the requisite information to make a fully informed decision is costly. It generally requires specific knowledge about politics and a requisite level of sophistication about national affairs. Instead, people look for shortcuts. Partisanship reduces the complexity of this task considerably. With partisanship, all you must do to assess the president’s performance is know if they are Democrat or Republican. I approve if they are from the party I identify with and disapprove if they are not. You can apply similar logic to a wide range of questions. Approve of the newest Supreme Court nominee? What about the president’s proposed trade deal? 

We universally recognize partisanship as important. Yet, there are multiple competing interpretations of what partisanship is. The American Voter’s authors viewed partisanship as emerging from more important group identities. Americans view the parties as representing specific groups in society and identify with the party that best represents their own groups. There are numerous potential examples. Democrats are for African Americans, while the Republicans are for white evangelical Christians. The Democrats are for labor unions, while the Republicans are for business. There are reasons for these associations between party and group rooted in group policy aims and the parties’ policy stances. But this is not how most people conceptualize partisan attachments. Rather, they view a party as representing their group—a conceptualization level that does not require much policy content. According to The American Voter and later by Green, Palmquist, and Schickler in Partisan Hearts and Minds (among others), partisanship is an overarching identity that draws its power from sociological building blocks like race, class, and gender (Green, Palmquist, and Schickler 2002; Achen and Bartels 2016; Huddy 2018). 

Other scholars view partisanship as an identity unto itself. Here, partisanship is not just a summation of other, more central social group memberships but rather an identity in its own right (Iyengar, Sood, and Lelkes 2012; Huddy, Mason, and Aaroe 2015; Theodoridis 2017; Mason 2018). These identity-based perspectives have gained traction in recent years as American politics have become more vitriolic and partisanship more central to the average American’s self-concept. I am agnostic about whether partisanship is an umbrella identity that reflects an individual’s membership in more foundational social groupings or whether it is standalone. These perspectives are observationally equivalent when it comes to the questions I seek to answer. Partisanship is a bedrock political identity. That much is clear. My question is whether it is the only bedrock disposition? Or is there room for other variables, such as policy attitudes, to shape behavior? 

One critique of the policy orientations perspective is that individuals’ policy attitudes reflect partisanship—they have no independent predictive power. According to this line of thought, most individuals do not hold meaningful policy orientations. Rather they look to the parties to tell them where to stand. Republican partisans will adopt Republican elites’ policy attitudes, while Democratic partisans will look to Democratic elites. Here, policy attitudes are a byproduct of partisanship. If an individual becomes aware of their position conflicts with that of their party, they will not look for a new party. They will update their policy attitudes to reflect the party line better. Only a small minority of people know and care enough about specific issues to switch parties. There is certainly evidence to support this position (Lenz 2012; Barber and Pope 2019). 

While I do not doubt partisanship is a key disposition, I am skeptical of the claim that it is devoid of policy content. I argue that policy orientations inform partisan identifications, especially in highly polarized political contexts. This expectation builds off an emerging body of evidence that demonstrates policy orientations do influence partisanship—people update their partisanship to match their policy orientations and other core beliefs (Lupton and McKee 2020; Goren and Chapp 2017). I do not argue that partisanship does not also shape policy orientations or that these relationships do not vary—they do. I provide evidence that policy orientations influence partisanship more than many theorize. My view is that partisanship and policy orientations are both important dispositions—they affect each other and jointly shape vote choice. Sometimes partisanship shapes policy orientations more strongly than policy orientations shape partisanship. Other times, the reverse is true. What determines the strength of this interrelationship? I argue that a third variable conditions the relationship—the clarity of the parties’ positions.

### Elite Context

This book’s core theme is that mass behavior is context-dependent. Individuals face the task of making sense of a highly complicated political system. People use different approaches. Some are well informed and base their partisan affiliations and voting decisions on how well the parties’ positions match their own. Others are less sophisticated and lean on partisan attachments shaped by perceptions of group interest or the “nature of the times,” as Campbell et al. (1960) theorized. Many scholars, often implicitly, assume that these determinants of vote choice are static. Scholars are divided about whether individuals hold meaningful policy attitudes (some say no) and whether these policy attitudes (assuming people, or some subset of people, hold them) shape vote choice. My argument is that claims should be temporally bound—context shapes how people behave. People do not come to political decisions in just one unvarying way. The extent to which people rely on policy attitudes, partisanship, and other dispositions depends on the context. 

My conception of political context is rooted in the idea that citizens are sensitive to what elites do. People are more likely to lean on policy orientations when the parties stake out clear, opposing positions on the issues. When the parties demarcate their platforms, people are more reliant on policy orientations. Polarization reduces the informational burden. It is easier for citizens to tell which candidate’s position is closer to his or her own when (1) on average, the Republican Party is to the right of the Democratic Party on every issue; and (2) there is little variation between candidates within the same party. We see this today, where the parties are starkly polarized, and most regional within-party variation has disappeared. In previous eras, the differences between the parties were much less clear-cut. Policy orientations were less relevant, or at least harder to connect with specific parties or candidates. Figuring out where the parties stood required more effort, and frankly, most Americans were not willing to expend the energy. 

“Political context” is a broad term. Therefore, I am careful to provide a clear empirical definition. I conceive of elite context as having two empirical components: each congressional party’s average position (across the entire delegation) and the amount of clarity around this average position. I define a party’s average position as the party’s congressional delegation’s mean position on the main left-right ideological dimension (I rely on several congressional ideology measures in the later chapters). I define clarity as the standard deviation around each party’s mean position. The difference between the party means is a measure of how far apart the parties are. The dispersion around each party’s mean position describes how varied party members are. Citizens will be more likely to see important differences between the parties when the distance between the party medians is large, and the variation around each party’s median is small. [^1] 

Imagine we examined the positions of all congressional Democrats on a particular issue. The median Democrat takes a moderate position. However, this apparent moderation is an artifact of measurement because congressional Democrats are adopting a wide range of positions, varying from conservative to liberal. The median position is moderate, but the party is not conveying a unified position—far from it. In these cases, citizens will have difficulty determining where the party stands because individual legislators run the gamut from liberal to conservative. Compare this to a scenario where the median congressional Democrat adopts a liberal position. What is more, all Democratic members of Congress adopt the same liberal position. In this scenario, all elected Democrats are liberal, and there is no variation around the median position. This scenario implies that Democrats from all over the country are adopting the same position. This increased clarity reduces citizens’ informational burden. Democrats are liberal. More important, Democratic candidates are uniformly liberal across constituencies. As a result, citizens can easily relate their attitudes to the party offerings. 

Partisanship is the dominant force in this first scenario. Why vote based on policy orientations if it is difficult to tell the parties’ policies apart? In these situations, partisanship takes over. However, policy orientations become more relevant when the parties offer clear alternatives. This book focuses on American politics from the early 1970s to the present. During this period, we saw a reorganization of the parties. The Republican Party became the vehicle for the conservative movement. The party became increasingly ideologically conservative on economic, social, and racial issues. The Democrats, on the other hand, lost the South. For most of the twentieth century, the Democratic coalition was made up of strange bedfellows—an odd conglomeration of Northeastern and Midwestern urban liberals and rural Southern conservatives. This marriage of convenience became untenable when conservative Southern Democrats could no longer keep African American civil rights off the agenda. The thirty years following the Voting Rights Act of 1965 saw the Democrats lose the South to the Republicans—first on the presidential level and then on the congressional and state levels. This process culminated in Gingrich’s Republican takeover in 1994. Today, the vast majority of Democrats in Congress from the Deep South are liberal African Americans from majority-minority districts. As a result, the remaining Democratic coalition is uniformly liberal. 

Citizens face a much different set of choices today from what they did in the 1970s. I argue that these changes have had a profound effect on mass behavior. People have commitments to both parties and policies. Sometimes policy orientations and partisanship are reinforcing. Other times they conflict. What happens in these instances? The answer to this question depends on the context. People are less likely to overlook a policy mismatch when the elites are polarized. My expectation is that policy attitudes have become an increasingly powerful predictor of political behavior since the 1970s and particularly after 1994, when elite polarization reached new levels. Policy attitudes and partisanship are both important but matter in different ways at different times.

### Political Sophistication

I center my analysis on three key variables: policy orientations, partisanship, and elite context. My argument is that policy orientations and partisanship shape vote choice. The magnitude of the effects depends upon elite contexthigh levels of elite polarization trigger greater reliance on policy orientations. Yet, individual context is important too. People vary in how likely they are to have meaningful policy attitudes. They also vary in how much attention they pay to politics and how receptive they are to environmental changes. Namely, a person’s level of political sophistication dictates their propensity to vote based on policy and respond to changes in context. Political scientists think of political sophistication as a “combination of factual and associational political knowledge stored in long-term memory” (Goren 2013: 58; also see Neuman 1986; Luskin 1987). Measures of sophistication combine an individual’s command of the facts with their ability to link abstract and factual knowledge (e.g., does an individual know what the words “liberal” and “conservative” mean, and can they tell which party is more liberal/conservative than the other?).

It is easy to see how an individual’s command of the political facts and their ability to reason about politics abstractly—both of which are at the core of political sophistication—might shape their behaviors. To vote based on policy orientations, people must hold meaningful attitudes and be aware of how the parties line up with their positions. A person’s level of political engagement conditions the effects of all these dispositions. The most highly knowledgeable have the most constrained policy attitudes (Converse 1964; Jewitt and Goren 2016; Kinder and Kalmoe 2017). They have the best sense of how issues fit together. They are also the most reliant on policy attitudes when deciding what party to identify with and vote for (Zingher and Flynn 2019). Perhaps more important, a large body of literature shows that receptiveness to elite cues vary as a function of sophistication (Zaller 1992; Layman and Carsey 2002; Goren 2004; Layman et al. 2010). When elite positions change, the highly engaged are the first to notice. 

I argue that citizens’ policy orientations become stronger predictors of behavior in response to increases in polarization. The effect is not uniform across the population. People with high levels of political sophistication are the most sensitive. Thus, when candidates and parties change positions, the sophisticated are the most likely to notice and react systematically. One question is whether people with low levels of political engagement are sensitive to anything going on at the elite level. After all, only 60 percent of adults vote in presidential elections. Turnout is far less in off years. Are the politically apathetic sensitive to changes in context? This question is important. If not, it means that the more engaged segments of the electorate drive macropolitical changes. This possibility is consistent with several important works, all of which argue that changes among the politically sophisticated drive changes in mass attitudes and behaviors (Page and Shapiro 1992; Erikson, MacKuen, and Stimson 2002). Others, notably Enns and Kellstedt (2008) and Goren (2013), argue that even those with lower levels of political engagement are sensitive to changes in the political environment, provided that the cues they receive are blunt and sustained. 

It is hard to argue that elite polarization in contemporary American politics is neither blunt nor sustained. Throughout this book, I demonstrate that the less engaged are susceptible to elite influences, although in a more limited set of circumstances than their more highly engaged counterparts. Those with low engagement levels are less likely to think of politics in terms of policy. Changes in context do not affect their propensity to vote based on policy orientations as much relative to those with high levels. Yet, less likely does not mean not at all. Even the least sophisticated segment has become more likely to connect policy attitudes with vote choice. 

I propose a model of political behavior that is grounded in policy attitudes and partisanship. Americans favor certain types of government action. Americans identify with and are attached to political parties. Their effects on vote choice, antipathy toward out-partisans, racial attitudes, and the like are context-dependent. People look toward the elites for cues. Elite polarization amplifies the effect of policy attitudes. In polarized contexts, citizens get clear signals about where the parties stand on policy. In turn, this makes it easier for them to tell what party matches their positions. On the individual level, the propensity to vote based on policy orientations, and the receptiveness to elite cues, are conditional upon sophistication.


### Analytical Approach and Data

The coming sections outline my approach to testing these propositions. Understanding how and why Americans vote the way they do is a complex question. Coming up with convincing answers is no easy task. I adopt a multi-step empirical approach to meet this challenge. This approach relies on several different types of data, measurement techniques, and statistical analyses. I utilize panel data that track the same individuals over time and cross-sectional data that feature a different representative sample each year. Panel data allow me to assess within-individual change over time. Cross-sectional data allow me to assess change in the electorate. I combine these individual-level data with elite-level data. These data use information about how Congress members vote on important bills to construct estimates of their overall ideologies. Legislators are assigned a place along a liberal-conservative continuum based on how they vote on legislation. These data allow me to develop a polarization-based measure of elite context that is comparable across years and extends far back in time. The combination of mass and elite-level data allows me to assess how elite positions shape mass-level attitudes and behaviors. 

My approach starts at the individual level and builds up. I test what factors shape individual-level behavior and then assess how political context moderates these effects. These analyses provide a foundation. I use these findings to build up and draw conclusions about the electorate. Polarization, after all, is a characteristic of a group. Claims about polarization pertain to populations, electorates, and legislatures, not individuals. I build off my findings of how elite polarization shapes individual-level behavior to conclude how polarization has transformed the electorate.

### Research Design

My research design utilizes both repeated panel data—data that follow the same individuals across different points in time—and cross-sectional time series data—data that feature a different representative cross-section of the electorate in each year. I use repeated panel data to assess the sources of change within individuals. I use these data to assess a key question: do people bring their partisanship in line with their policy attitudes? Or is it the reverse or some combination of the two? Repeated panel data allow me to track individuals across different points in time and see how this process unfolds. These data allow me to establish the individual-level foundations of my argument. I then use cross-sectional time series data to assess partisan change on the macro-level. Cross-sectional data are excellent for analyzing broad social changes (Firebaugh 2008). They allow me to assess change in relationships between key variables across the entire electorate over a long period (Firebaugh 2008: 175). I use the repeated cross-sections to assess how the relationships between policy orientations, partisanship, elite polarization, and vote choice have changed. 

Both types of data are necessary to fully test my claims. The first point I must establish is that policy orientations are an important driver of change within individuals. My argument rests on the claim that individuals bring their partisanship in line with their policy orientations. The only way to determine this is to track individuals over time and see if this occurs. If not, my claim that policy orientations are a key political disposition falls flat, and the rest of my argument falls apart. Yet, if individuals do update their partisanship to better match their attitudes (and I find that they do), then I can proceed further and assess how these changes on the individual level transform the electorate. This is where the cross-sectional time series data comes into play. I use these data to assess the relationship between policy orientations and political choice across the electorate. My primary expectation is that elite polarization amplifies the effect of policy orientations, but this possibility only holds if the repeated panel data reveal that individual level policy attitudes are stable. Thus, I need to utilize both panel and cross-sectional time series data to test my argument.

### Individual-Level Data

I rely on two primary sources for public opinion data—the American National Election Study (ANES) and the General Social Survey (GSS, NORC 2020). These nationally representative surveys are two of the most widely leveraged social science datasets and are excellent for answering the types of questions I ask throughout this book. They cover a considerable period and are of consistently high quality. Both sources provide cross-sectional time series data that span multiple decades and repeated panel data that span two- or four-year intervals. The ANES, housed out of the University of Michigan, has asked Americans about their political attitudes and behaviors since 1948. Administered (at least) every four years, the ANES is a foundational and comprehensive resource. Beginning with the landmark study The American Voter in 1960, generations of social scientists have used the ANES to understand the dynamics of American public opinion and political behavior. 

I support my ANES analyses with a series of replications using data from the GSS. The GSS is an often-overlooked data source among political scientists. This lack of use is unfortunate because the GSS has several attractive features. While the GSS might not contain the extensive battery of political questions like the ANES, it contains all the basics like party identification and presidential vote choice. It also asks questions about a wide variety of political attitudes. Equally important, since the GSS is not specifically a political survey, it is collected every year. The GSS does not conduct its interviews in conjunction with presidential elections. It is primarily a sociological survey. This fact reduces the possibility that respondents will engage in expressive responding—which could lead them to overstate the intensity of their policy attitudes and how closely their attitudes match those of their party. In simpler terms, individuals are less primed to think about politics when they respond to the GSS. Thus, the GSS data provide a more difficult empirical test of my argument. 

In the initial empirical chapter, I focus to sources of individual-level change. Here, I rely on a series of repeated panels that span the following years: 1992–1996 and 2000–2004. I supplement my analysis of the ANES panel data with the analysis of GSS panel data. I rely on panels that track the same individuals during the periods 2006–2010, 2008–2012, 20102014, and 2016–2020. I use these panels to assess how policy orientations and partisanship affect each other. These additional panels provide some important additional evidence. In the later empirical chapters, I rely on the ANES and GSS cumulative files, which are both a series of nationally representative cross-sections. The ANES data span 1972–2016, while the GSS data span 1983–2016. I use these cross-sections to establish the broad contours—the relationships between policy orientations, partisanship, elite polarization, and voter behavior. These analyses establish how the relationships between these core orientations and behaviors have changed as polarization has increased. 

My theory details how changes at the elite level—which have unfolded over decades—have transformed mass behavior. As a result, I need data that span multiple decades to test my argument. My analyses of the ANES and GSS data span a much longer period than almost any other major work in political science, which typically focuses on a smaller set of elections. As a result, my data and design allow me to assess mass behavior across a longer period than is typical, allowing me to identify changes that might otherwise go unnoticed. I argue that much of what we think we know about mass political behavior is an artifact of context. The claims made by the authors of The American Voter do not generalize across decades nearly as well as we often suppose. Instead, I argue we can only hope to understand mass behavior in context, and I work throughout the book to integrate elite context in a theoretically and empirically rigorous way. To the best of my knowledge, this is a novel approach within political science. I hope it will help to resolve many of the conflicting findings within the political behavior and public opinion literatures. 

Additionally, the use of two independent datasets offers some important advantages. The multiple sources provide a more thorough test of my theory. The ANES is an expressly political survey, while the GSS is not. These differences between the two surveys have the potential to produce different patterns of results. Thus, it will speak to the validity of my argument if I find similar patterns. More broadly, the GSS data allow me to assess whether my findings hold across different question wordings, sampling procedures, and the like.

### Elite-Level Data

I supplement the individual-level data with a wide variety of measures of partisan and ideological polarization among elites. I also use more general data on elite positions. I use two main sources of data on elite positions: the NOMINATE data, which assign members of Congress a liberalism-conservatism score based on their pattern of roll call votes, and the Americans for Democratic Action (ADA) rankings, which rank members of Congress according to what the ADA identifies as the fourteen most important roll call votes in each year. 

The NOMINATE data are the gold standard in terms of measures of legislator ideology. The NOMINATE data assign each legislator an ideology score based on how the individual MC votes. The NOMINATE data break legislator ideology into two dimensions. The first dimension is the economic left-right dimension. The importance and substantive interpretation of the second dimension have evolved. The economic first dimension always divides the parties. Sometimes the second dimension crosscuts the party coalition. The second dimension was vitally important in the lead-up to the Civil War, where slavery internally divided both the Democratic and Whig parties (ultimately fracturing the Whigs, leading to the emergence of the Republican Party). In the 1960s, votes on civil rights legislation fell on this second dimension—again crosscutting the typical economic coalitions. The second dimension’s explanatory power has decreased in the post–civil rights era, as the parties became more internally unified. In contemporary politics, economic, social, and racial issues divide the parties—crosscutting issues have largely disappeared. As Poole and Rosenthal (1997) have noted, all roll call votes fall along a single dimension in contemporary American politics. Including a second dimension does not explain any additional variance, as it did in previous eras. The collapse of the second dimension helps explain why voters’ perceptions of the party brands are now much clearer—there are no major issues on which the parties are internally divided. 

The fact that I integrate elite level data into models of individual level behavior is critical. My theory rests on the idea that people behave differently in different contexts. Thus, we should not expect political behavior to be consistent across eras. It varies as a function of contextual changes. Yet, testing this expectation requires contextual data that span decades. This is what makes the NOMINATE and other similar data sources so valuable—they allow me to integrate data about elite context into individual level models of political choice. This allows me to tell a nuanced story. Policy orientations and partisanship both matter, but how they matter depends on environment. 

I supplement these two main measures with some additional measures of elite polarization. I use Shor and McCarty’s State Legislator Ideological Data (2020) to illustrate state-level polarization. Shor and McCarty’s data are like the NOMINATE data, except that they produce an ideological score for state legislators, as opposed to members of Congress. Combining these various data sources helps me paint a complete picture of the state and national parties’ evolution over the past fifty years. These disparate data all tell the same story. Elites are polarized along partisan and ideological lines.

### Plan of the Book

I organize my argument along the following lines. I provide a conceptual and theoretical overview and then test my claims with statistical analyses of public opinion data. Chapter 2 details the book’s core theoretical concepts. Here I explain and fully define policy orientations, partisanship, elite context, and political sophistication and detail the interrelationships between them. The chapter also discusses the various perspectives regarding the structure of American public opinion. It provides an overview of the debate between those who think that most Americans have no true attitudes and those who think that Americans do have meaningful policy attitudes, and it discusses the evidence in favor of each perspective. It then reveals how the policy orientations perspective helps make sense of these seemingly conflicting evidence patterns. It also lays out a theoretical model that explains why policy orientations’ predictive power is conditional upon elite polarization. Here, I argue that we should expect that citizen’s policy orientations shape voting behavior most strongly when the parties have presented a clear set of policy alternatives at the ballot box. 

Chapter 3 gives a historical overview. The chapter outlines how elite polarization has increased across multiple levels of government and in the media. It lays out evidence that shows voters face a much different set of choices from what they did several decades ago. These differences are reflected up and down the ballot. The chapter then discusses why these elite-level changes have been fundamental to making Americans’ policy orientations more relevant. These changes among the parties are reshaping citizen perceptions. The chapter concludes by demonstrating that Americans now see important differences between the parties and correctly place them in ideological space. 

Chapter 4 focuses on measurement. The chapter begins with a presentation and discussion of several measurement models. I use these models to show that ANES and GSS respondents’ policy attitudes reduce to two broad dimensions—one economic and the other social. The chapter demonstrates that different measurement techniques produce broadly comparable results. It concludes with a discussion of political sophistication and a demonstration that Americans of all sophistication levels hold meaningful policy orientations. 

I present the first empirical tests in chapter 5, which addresses a key threat to validity. Here, I test the recursive relationship between policy orientations and partisanship. Proponents of the Michigan Model argue that policy orientations are just a product of partisanship. This chapter shows that policy orientations are independent of partisanship and that policy orientations influence partisanship. The analysis demonstrates that partisanship and policy orientations jointly influence each other, but there is no evidence that one dominates the other. These dispositions are highly stable and slow to change. 

Chapter 6 builds off this insight. Here, I assess the predictive power of policy orientations across a range of dependent variables. It demonstrates that policy orientations strongly predict vote choice, even when controlling for partisanship. Chapter 7 refines the empirical evidence by bringing elite context into account. This chapter demonstrates that not only are policy orientations important predictors of behavior, but their predictive powers are increasing. I assess how political sophistication conditions individuals’ responses to elite polarization in chapter 8. Here, I demonstrate citizens of all sophistication levels respond to polarized elite politics. Chapter 9 concludes with a discussion of the major findings. The chapter covers the implications of increased policy voting for representation and governance.


[^1]: While a party’s median position and the dispersion around this median position are both relevant and important, from an empirical perspective, the two components are inversely correlated so strongly that they are impossible to disentangle. The party medians are growing farther apart and the dispersion around these medians is decreasing. The correlation between the two items is nearly −1. Therefore, I use the simpler measure of “distance between party medians” as my measure of elite context, even though I believe dispersion matters as well.
