“Beyond Tocqueville, Myrdal, and Hartz: The Multiple Traditions in America”
ROGERS M. SMITH
Political culture refers to the orientation of citizens toward the political system and toward themselves as actors in it. This includes the basic values, beliefs, attitudes, predispositions, and expectations that citizens bring to political life. Given the great diversity of the American population, one might expect a similarly diverse array of thought within political culture, with rival sets of political values challenging each other. However, even amidst this diversity of population, many scholars have argued that American political culture centers around commonly held beliefs, in part because of the unique characteristics of the founding of the United States. One influential interpretation is that American political life has been guided by the “liberal tradition.” The terms liberalism, liberal consensus, and American creed have been used by other authors. Liberal here refers to its original meaning from eighteenth-century political and economic theory—a philosophy that focuses on the individual and minimizing government intervention in daily life. Within the liberal tradition, the beliefs in equality, private property, liberty, individualism, protection of religious freedom, and democracy are especially powerful. There is certainly debate over what these terms mean or how heavily to weigh one belief versus another when they are in conflict, and these clashes drive a wedge between Republicans and Democrats in the United States today. But in this interpretation, social and political movements in the United States, such as the civil rights and women’s rights movements, have generally not directly challenged these beliefs. On the contrary, most movements seek to show how their beliefs are highly consistent with these basic American principles.

Where liberalism points to notions of equality, political scientist Rogers M. Smith argues that there is another, very different, tradition in American political thought that has been influential. He does not deny the significance of liberalism in American political history, as described most prominently by political scientist Louis Hartz. Smith, however, contends that an equally significant strand of thought, “ascriptive Americanism,” has been important across U.S. history. In this way of thinking, society is a hierarchy, where some groups are on top and others are below. Those on top are deemed to be deserving of the rights and benefits that the liberal tradition can offer. Those below are not. The most glaring examples of this disturbing pattern throughout American history have been the treatment of racial and ethnic minorities, especially African Americans, and the structure of laws that denied women the same opportunities as men. Smith notes that those holding these illiberal views were not on the fringes of society but, rather, were probably the majority view at many times. We should not, Smith argues, minimize the impact of ascriptive Americanism or those who held these views. American public policy at the highest levels was influenced by its premises. Researchers at universities and other institutions aimed to show through science the inferiority of some races and groups to others. Moreover, the same individuals expended great intellectual energy to make these illiberal views seem acceptable and consistent with the liberal beliefs that they held simultaneously. American political culture, in Smith’s view, combines multiple traditions of thought.

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS

According to Smith, what are some examples of how Americans in the late nineteenth century simultaneously held liberal and ascriptive Americanist views?

How would you know if belief in ascriptive hierarchy was as widespread as Smith contends? What kind of evidence would you look for?
How might advocates of liberalism and ascriptive Americanism define “the public good”?
